Hello, I am Dr. Jason mass, and in this lecture, I will cover the fundamentals of significant figures. First, let me tell you the goal of using significant figures. Scientists perform experiments and make measurements. With those measurements, computations are done. So, for example, the distance and object travels and the time it takes can be divided to compute the average speed. Here, the distance traveled and the time taken. Our measurements. And the average speed is a computation is done with those measurements. The measurements that were made have limited precision. So, for example, rulers can only measure to the nearest millimeter, and most stopwatches measured to the nearest cent the second, that is 1 100th of a second. The question becomes, what is the precision of the resultant computations? The method of significant figures is one method of addressing this question. Significant figures keeps everyone honest about the precision of your measurements and the results. The problem is that displaying too many figures is dishonest. Let me show you. For example, 123 meters was traveled in 53 seconds. The average speed is 123 meters divided by 53 seconds. And we get approximately 2.320754, and then there's more digits in meters per second. The result here claims to have 19 significant figures. However, in all of civilization, there does not exist any instrument that can measure that many digits. This result is dishonest about its precision. Is the result cannot be more precise than its inputs. So we will look at significant figures as a way of keeping us honest about the precision of our results. Let's do an example of addition. Let's say you wanted to add two length measurements, 1.3 centimeters and 0.28 centimeters. What is the resultant sum? First, you would write it the problem like this. First you would convert both quantities to the same unit. And in this case they're already both in centimeters. Then you would line up the two numbers at the decimal point. The resulting sum will be in centimeters because both inputs are already in centimeters. Now we add the digits going right to left. Above the eight, no digit is written. So we just assume that it's 0. And I'll put it in here in red. So 0 plus eight is 83, plus two is five, and carry the decimal point, then one plus 0 is one. So the calculator will tell you that 1.3 plus 0.28 equal to 1.58. However, the digit May 0 not actually be 0. The person who did this measurement did not write down 0. They didn't write anything. Because they didn't write anything. That means that it is unknown. It is not measured. We don't know actually what it is. It could be 0, it could be any other value. So in reality, it's not 0. It's a question mark, it's a variable. And so the more honest addition is, what does an unknown value plus eight? Well, that's just a different unknown value. That is at least eight. It could be larger.

Again, the reason we say that the digit is unknown is because it wasn't measured. Digits that are measured are written down. Even if they're 0.

Even if they're 0. Digits that are not written down were not measured. And that's why they weren't written. And that's the lesson here. The value is 1.3 centimeters and 1.30 centimeters represent different levels of precision. Length. 1.3 centimeters was measured to the nearest millimeter, whereas 1.30 centimeters was measured to the nearest tenth of a millimeter. And so the correct answer is 1.6 centimeters. The reason the five became a six is because the digit after that is at least eight, or it could be larger. And so when rounding the five will become eight. And so 1.3 centimeters plus 0.28 centimeters equals 1.6 centimeters. Let's now look at scientific notation. Any quantity n can be written in scientific notation. And it looks like this. N equals a times ten to the power of p and has some unit. Here, a is a number between 110 and includes trailing zeros that happened to be significant. And p is an integer that is the exponent. Here are some examples. 4,568.300 seconds can be written in scientific notation like this. 4.568300 times ten to the power of three seconds. This quantity has seven significant figures, and the two trailing zeros are significant. And so they are included when writing it down. Here's another example. 0.0018220 meters can be written as 1.8220 times ten to the power of negative three meters. Here again, the trailing 0 is significant and so is included. In both of these cases. The number 4.5683001.8220 or a, the exponents are three and negative three respectively. You should pause here and review this to make sure that you understand how any number can be written in scientific notation. On this slide are various examples of quantities with 12 or three significant figures. Pause here to review these quantities and make sure you can identify which digits are significant and which digit is the least significant digit. It is important to note that a May 0 or may not be significant depending on its placement. To help clarify which zeros are significant, quantities are often written in scientific notation. If you are unsure about any of these, reach out to your instructor for clarification. Let's now review the rules around significant figures and mathematical operations. For addition and subtraction. The least significant figure and the result is limited by the least significant figure of the inputs. For multiplication, division, powers and roots, the number of significant figures. And the result is the minimum number of significant figures of the inputs. The above rules only apply to the final result. Keep more digits for intermediate computations and round in the end. We'll see some examples of these on the next slide. Also note significant figures only apply to measurements. Exact quantities such as definitions, integers, and unit conversions generally have unlimited precision. Let's now do some examples. Let's say for example, we would like to compute 55.658 plus 2.41 minus 0.0550. If you type this onto a calculator, you will get 58.013. Now we need to identify in which digits are significant. And the first term, there are three digits that are significant past the decimal point. And the second term, there are two digits past the decimal point. And in the third term, there are four digits that are significant acid decimal point. The limiting term is the second one which only has two digits. They are significant past the decimal point, which means that in the final result, there can only be two digits past the decimal point that are significant. And so we dropped the three. And the final result is 58.01. Now that was for addition and subtraction. It's a little bit different for multiplication and division. Let's say you would like to multiply 5.04 times 18.33 times 2 triple 0. If you apply this on a calculator, you will get 184.766. For. Now, we need to identify which digits are significant. The first factor has three significant digits. The second factor has four. And the third factor also has 43 is the lowest number of those three. And so the results can only have three significant figures. The 4.7 will get rounded up to a five. And so the final answer is 185. And this next example, we'll take the square root of 1.2 divided by 0.0703. If you typed this into a calculator, you will get a very long number, 4.1315495, and then many more digits. We need to truncate this number to the correct number of significant digits and the numerator of this ratio, there are two significant figures. And the denominator, there are 3703, are significant. Here we are dividing. And so our result is limited to the minimum of 23, which is two. Then the square root will also have the same number as i means the final result can only have two significant figures. And so the result is 4.1. Go ahead and pause here and review these examples and make sure that you understand how the correct number of significant figures was determined. If you have any questions, please reach out to your instructor.